# Programming Methods {#Programming Principles for Hardware Accelerators}

The first two sections of this chapter primarily discuss the
significance, ideas, and basic principles behind the design of hardware
accelerators. Co-optimization of software and hardware, as an important
guiding principle for building efficient AI systems, requires mutual
influence and close coupling between software algorithms/stacks and
hardware architectures in neural network applications. In order to fully
leverage the advantages of accelerators, it is necessary to design a set
of programming methods based on the hardware system architecture.

## Method Classification

Programming methods for hardware accelerators are categorized into three
approaches: using high-level computation operators, harnessing
primitives for specialized hardware units, and employing low-level
assembly languages:

1.  **High-level computation operators**: Hardware accelerators often
    come equipped with high-level, hardware-accelerated implementations
    of operators extensively used in numerical computing and deep
    learning. For instance, NVIDIA provides cuBLAS (CUDA Basic Linear
    Algebra Subprograms) and cuDNN (CUDA Deep Neural Network library).
    These libraries offer developers an accessible way to harness the
    power of NVIDIA GPUs without delving into low-level code. These
    operators are optimized for efficiency and automatically exploit
    specific GPU features, such as Tensor Cores.

2.  **Primitives for task-specific hardware units:**: Hardware
    accelerators typically feature task-specific hardware units (like
    the Tensor Cores in NVIDIA GPUs) engineered to execute
    mixed-precision matrix multiplication operations at high speed.
    These units have associated programming primitives, such as CUDA's
    Warp Matrix Multiply Accumulate (WMMA) and primitives for
    loading/unloading tensors on the units.

3.  **Low-level assembly languages**: Hardware accelerators also have
    low-level assembly language interfaces. For instance, NVIDIA GPUs
    offer the PTX ISA (Parallel Thread Execution Instruction Set
    Architecture). It provides explicit control over all aspects of GPU
    behavior, but it requires a deep understanding of the GPU
    architecture and is more challenging to use correctly and
    effectively than the high-level interfaces provided by cuBLAS and
    cuDNN. PTX code is typically generated by a compiler from a
    high-level language like CUDA C++.

In essence, the above three methods operate at different levels of
abstraction. High-level operators like cuBLAS and cuDNN provide
easy-to-use interfaces to powerful hardware-accelerated operations,
while the primitives provided by task-specific hardware units provide a
more detailed interface to hardware operations, and low-level assembly
languages like PTX ISA provide the most detailed, low-level control over
accelerator behavior.

## Programming Examples

We exemplify different programming methods by implementing the General
Matrix Multiplication (GEMM) with each approach. The implementation
targets an NVIDIA Volta GPU. GEMM follows the equation
$\bf{C} = \alpha \bf{A}\times \bf{B} + \beta \bf{C}$, where
$\bf{A}\in\mathbb{R}^{M\times K}, \bf{B}\in\mathbb{R}^{K\times N}, \bf{C}\in\mathbb{R}^{M\times N}$,
and $\alpha$ and $\beta$ are parameters provided by users.

### High-level Computation Operators {#sec-accelerator-use-cublas}

Using an operator acceleration library directly is the most
straightforward method. NVIDIA offers two types of operator libraries:
cuBLAS and cuDNN. cuBLAS provides an interface for leveraging Tensor
Cores to accelerate GEMM operations, while cuDNN offers an interface to
hasten neural network operations. To utilize Tensor Cores via cuBLAS
doing GEMM, we can use function `cublasGemmEx`, its signature is shown
in Code :numref:`lst:cublasGemmEx`.

    ```
        cublasStatus_t cublasGemmEx(cublasHandle_t handle, cublasOperation_t transa, cublasOperation_t transb, int m, int n, int k, const void *alpha, const void *A, cudaDataType_t Atype, int lda, const void *B, cudaDataType_t Btype, int ldb, const void *beta, void *C, cudaDataType_t Ctype, int ldc, cublasComputeType_t computeType, cublasGemmAlgo_t algo)
    ```
    :label:`lst:cublasGemmEx`

`handle` is the cuBLAS handle, which is created using the `cublasCreate`
function. `transa` denotes whether the matrices $\bf{A}$ and $\bf{C}$
are transposed, while `transb` denotes whether the matrix $\bf{B}$ is
transposed. `m`, `n`, and `k` are used to describe the shape of the
matrices. `alpha` and `beta` are used to scale the matrix multiplication
results. `A`, `B`, and `C` are pointers to the starting addresses of the
matrices. `Atype`, `Btype`, and `Ctype` describe the data type of the
matrices. For example, `CUDA_R_16F` indicates that the data is stored in
real 16-bit floating point type. `lda`, `ldb`, and `ldc` represent the
leading dimensions of the matrices. `computeType` is the data type used
in computation. For instance, `CUBLAS_COMPUTE_16F` implies the use of
Tensor Cores for computation in 16-bit floating point. Notably, if the
input data type is 32-bit float, we can use
`CUBLAS_COMPUTE_32F_FAST_16F` to perform the computation in 16-bit
floating point and achieve acceleration using Tensor Cores. `algo` is
the algorithm used in computation, and `CUBLAS_GEMM_DEFAULT` is commonly
used to select the default algorithm.

### Primitives for Hardware Units

The second approach to accelerator programming involves the use of
programming primitives, such as invoking the CUDA Warp Matrix Multiply
Accumulate (WMMA) API on a device. This approach hinges on the
collaborative design of software and hardware, meaning that the design
of programming APIs at this level is architecture-dependent. For
instance, in the Volta architecture, the control object of WMMA is a
$16\times16$ matrix block, processed by two Tensor Cores at a time. This
notion is tightly linked to the integration of Tensor Cores into a SM.

In the Volta architecture, NVIDIA offers three distinct sizes of WMMA
multiply-accumulate computing interfaces for FP16 input data:
$16\times16\times16$, $32\times8\times16$, and $8\times32\times16$.


[^1]: available at
    <https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/inline-ptx-assembly/index.html>
