# Overview

A reinforcement learning system consists of at least three key
components: an agent, an environment, and a policy. The agent is
responsible for perceiving the state of the environment, selecting
actions to take based on the observed state, and receiving feedback in
the form of rewards or penalties. The environment represents the
external world in which the agent operates, and it responds dynamically
to the actions taken by the agent. The policy guides the agent's
decision-making process by mapping observed states to appropriate
actions.

The underlying principle of RL is to enable agents to learn from
experience rather than relying on explicit programming. This enables
them to adapt and discover effective strategies in complex and uncertain
environments. RL algorithms employ a trial-and-error approach, where
agents explore the environment, receive feedback, and update their
policies based on observed rewards. Over multiple iterations, the agent
gradually improves its decision-making capabilities, gaining insights
into the structure and dynamics of the environment.

The applications of RL span various domains, including robotics, game
playing, resource allocation, and control systems. RL has shown
remarkable success in mastering challenging tasks such as playing
complex games (e.g., Go, chess, and Atari games), controlling autonomous
vehicles, optimizing financial portfolios, and more. Its versatility and
potential have led to widespread interest and research efforts across
academia and industry.

This chapter has the following learning objectives:

1.  Understanding the basic concepts of single-agent RL.

2.  Understanding the basic framework of single-node RL systems with
    several examples.

3.  Understanding the basic framework of distributed RL systems with
    several examples.

4.  Understanding the basic concepts and algorithms of multi-agent RL.

5.  Understanding the basic framework and challenges of multi-agent RL
    systems.
